# Overview
While the VDR stores all vessel specific information, National Marine Electronics Association (NMEA) is the standard used to transfer data to it. NMEA networks are fundamentally based on the Controller Area Network (CAN) bus protocol. Initially designed for usage in automotive systems, the CANbus allows for broadcast-based information sharing in which each device is aware of other device's current status. Many of the features used by the CANbus protocol, such as efficient network entry and message encoding, provided a basis for the NMEA standard.

## NMEA 0183
Multiple versions of NMEA have been produced since its creation, but the two most notable editions were NMEA 0183 and NMEA 2000 due to their widespread implementation across vessels in the global maritime community. Released in the 1980s, NMEA 0183 allowed a single "talker" device to send data to more than one "listener" device in a reliable manner up to 50 meters away. It sends information using 8-bit American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) encoded data. For example, when a device sends information such as position or depth, there is a corresponding sentence with a prefix that notes the type of data with additional bits in the sentence for the actual data.

## NMEA 2000
Released in the early 2000s, NMEA introduced a new networking standard to be implemented on all new marine equipment due to an increased number of electronic instruments on ships. Compared to NMEA 0183, the NMEA 2000 as shown in figure  \ref{fig:nmea2000}, edition enabled "plug and play" communications since it allowed for power and ground capabilities in addition to data exchange. It sends information using hexadecimal encoded data transmitted in frames using a Parameter Group Number (PGN). The PGN serves as a data identifier, using a six digit decimal number or name. The hexadecimal data is formatted to a fixed length field, allowing for data to be easily identified with either a number or name associated to each device.

# NMEA Architecture
Generally, each version of NMEA uses the same architecture during implementation. Each device serves as a network node, sending data across a central backbone. The only significant changes between topologies will be the types of devices on the network, which is specific to the vessel.

It is common to see devices on a NMEA 2000 network that still transmit NMEA 0183 data. Using an NGW-1 converter cable, NMEA 0183 data can be easily transformed into NMEA 2000 data. The NMEA 0183 data is received, parsed, and turned into the NMEA 2000 format before being sent to the vessel network backbone.
